<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/MathML2/dtd/xhtml-math11-f.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><!--This file was converted to xhtml by OpenOffice.org - see http://xml.openoffice.org/odf2xhtml for more info.--><head profile="http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/"><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/><title xml:lang="en-US">- no title specified</title><meta name="DCTERMS.title" content="" xml:lang="en-US"/><meta name="DCTERMS.language" content="en-US" scheme="DCTERMS.RFC4646"/><meta name="DCTERMS.source" content="http://xml.openoffice.org/odf2xhtml"/><meta name="DCTERMS.issued" content="2003-07-09T10:06:30" scheme="DCTERMS.W3CDTF"/><meta name="DCTERMS.modified" content="2003-08-31T20:51:12" scheme="DCTERMS.W3CDTF"/><meta name="DCTERMS.provenance" content="" xml:lang="en-US"/><meta name="DCTERMS.subject" content="," xml:lang="en-US"/><link rel="schema.DC" href="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCTERMS" href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCTYPE" href="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCAM" href="http://purl.org/dc/dcam/" hreflang="en"/><base href="."/><style type="text/css">
	@page {  }
	table { border-collapse:collapse; border-spacing:0; empty-cells:show }
	td, th { vertical-align:top; font-size:12pt;}
	h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 { clear:both }
	ol, ul { margin:0; padding:0;}
	li { list-style: none; margin:0; padding:0;}
	<!-- "li span.odfLiEnd" - IE 7 issue-->
	li span. { clear: both; line-height:0; width:0; height:0; margin:0; padding:0; }
	span.footnodeNumber { padding-right:1em; }
	span.annotation_style_by_filter { font-size:95%; font-family:Arial; background-color:#fff000;  margin:0; border:0; padding:0;  }
	* { margin:0;}
	.P1 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P2 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;}
	.P3 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.T2 { vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;}
	<!-- ODF styles with no properties representable as CSS -->
	.Endnote_20_Symbol .Footnote_20_Symbol .T1 { }
	</style></head><body dir="ltr" style="max-width:8.5in;margin-top:1in; margin-bottom:1in; margin-left:1.25in; margin-right:1.25in; "><p class="P1">Chapter 12. Gene frequency.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The best-studied human genes are those that produce medical problems, such as hemolytic anemia in newborn. The Rhesus system is a set of antigens on red blood cells, of which the D agglutinogen is the strongest. It causes trouble when the mother is Rh-negative, and the fetus has inherited the D factor from the father. The immune system of the mother identifies the fetus as foreign, and produces antibodies that cause destruction of the fetal red cells. People may marry without inquiring into each other's blood types.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The symbol DD represents the genotype of someone who has received the D gene from both parents; the symbol dd indicates the genotype of a person lacking the antigen, known as Rh-negative (Rh<span class="T1">-);</span> the symbol Dd stands for the heterozygous or hybrid individual. In the blood donation center, DD and Dd people are lumped together as positives (Rh<span class="T1">+</span><span class="T2">)</span>. In the US, Rh<span class="T1">+</span> people make up 85 percent of the population, and Rh<span class="T1">-</span> the other 15 percent.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The frequency of the genes D and d in a population can be calculated from the phenotypic numbers by means of the Hardy-Weinberg rule. This principle was discovered independently by G. H. Hardy, a mathematician, and S. Weinberg, a physician. Call the frequency of the dominant gene p, and the frequency of the recessive allele q. Then, by random mating, the frequencies of the genotypes are:</p><p class="P1">                                            (p + q)<span class="T2">2 </span>= p<span class="T2">2</span> + 2pq + q<span class="T2">2</span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P3">This is called the expansion of a binomial. You learned this in Algebra 1.    In the case of the Rh factor, q<span class="T2">2</span> is the same as the fraction of Rh- people, stated above as 0.15. The gene frequencies are calculated as follows:</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">                                           q<span class="T2">2 </span>= 0.15       q = √0.15  = 0.387298334</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">                                             p = 1 - q = 0.612701665</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">This result allows calculation of the fractions of the two Rh+ genotypes.</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">                                          DD = p<span class="T2">2 </span>= ( 0.6127)<span class="T2">2 </span>= 0.3754</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">                                           Dd = 2 pq = 2 X 0.6127 X 0.3873 = 0.4746</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">Adding the dd fraction 0.15 makes the total 1.0, or 100 percent, as expected.</p><p class="P3">                                       </p><p class="P1"><span class="T1">Exercise 12-1. In some Asian populations, the fraction of dd</span><span class="T2"> </span><span class="T1">individuals has been reported as only 1 percent. Assuming exactly 0.010</span>, calculate the gene frequencies p and q.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   Gene frequencies may change as a result of mutation or selection or migration. As W. F. Ganong wrote, “In general, harmful mutations tend to die out, but mutant genes that confer traits with survival value persist and spread in the population.”  In effect, he stated the essence of human evolution.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The gene for sickle-cell anemia produces a modified hemoglobin molecule, which causes red blood cells to assume an abnormal sickle or crescent shape at low oxygen concentrations (Fig. 12-1). People with genotype ss are severely affected, those with Ss have few symptoms, and those with the dominant genotype SS are normal.  In some populations of equatorial Africa, sickle-cell anemia patients (ss) amount to 1 in 64 or more (0.015625), and people with the trait (Ss) up to 40%. Call the frequency of S, the normal allele, a, and call the frequency of s, the harmful mutant gene, b.  Applying the Hardy-Weinberg rule:</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">                b<span class="T2">2 </span>= 0.01562,   b = √0.01562 = 0.12498,    a = 1 - b = 0.8750</p><p class="P1">                                                        </p><p class="P1">These frequencies can be used to calculate the fractions of each class:</p><p class="P1"> Phenotype         Genotype          Frequency         Observed         Expected</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   normal             SS                       a<span class="T2">2 </span>                     0.58                0.765625</p><p class="P1">   carrier              Ss                      2ab                     0.40                0.218715</p><p class="P1">   afflicted           ss                        b<span class="T2">2 </span>                      0.01562</p><p class="P1">                                     </p><p class="P1">This result suggests that the observed fraction of carriers (Ss) is too high, and normal (SS) too low. Something is disturbing the genetic equilibrium.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Exercise 12-2. Calculate the expected gene frequencies in the African-American population, with the disease 1 in 500,  and the trait 1 in 12, using the reasoning and steps above.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">  In this case, the observed and expected are not far apart. What is different in Africa and America?  Many things, but the explanation seems to lie in the prevalence of malaria.  The abnormal hemoglobin hampers the rapid growth of the malarial parasite in the bloodstream, conferring a selective advantage on those with the sickle-cell trait, when they live in a region where malaria </p><p class="P1">is prevalent. Such regions are common in central Africa, uncommon in USA.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   A successful blood transfusion requires matching ABO blood types of donor and recipient. Everyone has one of the four types, A, B, O, or AB, genetically determined, and unaltered through life. In an incompatible transfusion, the donor is not harmed, but his red cells encounter antibody in the recipient's bloodstream, which causes them to agglutinate and block capillary circulation. Inheritance gives each person two out of the set of three genes, two of which, A and B, are co-dominant. The genes are designated</p><p class="P1">I<span class="T2">A</span>, I<span class="T2">B</span>, and i, for their role in producing isoagglutinogens.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">                   Phenotypes                  Genotypes                   Fraction in USA</p><p class="P1">                       A                                 I<span class="T2">A</span>I<span class="T2">A</span>, I<span class="T2"> A</span>i                        0.41</p><p class="P1">                       B                                 I<span class="T2">B</span>I<span class="T2">B</span>, I<span class="T2">B</span>i                         0.10</p><p class="P1">                       O                                    ii                                 0.45</p><p class="P1">                       AB                               I<span class="T2">A</span>I<span class="T2">B                                         </span><span class="T1">0.04 </span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P3"><span class="T2">    </span>If the gene frequencies are symbolized by p, q, and r, and the Hardy-Weinberg rule applies, then the fractions of the genotypes in a population should correspond to the expansion of a trinomial:</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">                          (p + q + r)<span class="T2">2</span> = p<span class="T2">2</span> + 2 pq + q<span class="T2">2 </span>+ 2 pr + 2 qr + r<span class="T2">2</span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">            <span class="T1">r</span>2 <span class="T1">= (frequency of ii)</span> <span class="T1">= fraction of type O in population = 45% in USA</span></p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">                                r<span class="T2">2 </span>= 0.45    r = √0.45 = 0.670820393</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P3">Type A corresponds to the terms of the expansion p<span class="T2">2 </span>+ 2 pr, and occurs in about 41% of people in the US. But we already have r, and we recognize, because of our familiarity with basic algebra, that p can be found, since:</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P1"><span class="T1">   (p + r)</span><span class="T2">2</span><span class="T1"> = p</span><span class="T2">2 </span><span class="T1">+ 2pr + r</span><span class="T2">2</span><span class="T1"> = 0.41 +  0.45 = 0.86 = total of type A and type O.</span></p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">        p + r = √0.86 = 0.927361849        p = 0.92736  - 0.67082 = 0.25654</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Since the sum must equal 1:   q = 1 - (p + r) = 1 - 0.92736 = 0.07263815</p><p class="P1"/><p class="P1">With the frequencies p, q, and r known, the expected fractions of types B and AB can be calculated, and compared with the reported fractions.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Type B:     q<span class="T2">2 </span>+ 2 qr = (0.07263815)<span class="T2">2</span> + 2 X 0.072638 X 0.67082 = 0.10273</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Type AB:    2pq = 2 X 0.25654 X 0.072638 = 0.03727</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   These results agree with the 10% and 4% listed above, and indicate a genetic equilibrium, sometimes called a balanced polymorphism. The fraction of people who are both AB and Rh-negative is:</p><p class="P1">    0.03727 X 0.15 = 0.0055905, or about 56 in 10 000.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Exercise 12-3.  The percentages of blood types in Japan are: O = 30, A = 38, B = 22, and AB = 10. Find the gene frequencies by the procedure shown here, and determine whether the fractions B and AB are consistent with the data.                 </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   Young couples in Japan have been reported to compare blood types when they first meet. Do not laugh; some of our own young people consider signs of the zodiac when choosing a potential mate.</p></body></html>