<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/MathML2/dtd/xhtml-math11-f.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><!--This file was converted to xhtml by OpenOffice.org - see http://xml.openoffice.org/odf2xhtml for more info.--><head profile="http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/"><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/><title xml:lang="en-US">- no title specified</title><meta name="DCTERMS.title" content="" xml:lang="en-US"/><meta name="DCTERMS.language" content="en-US" scheme="DCTERMS.RFC4646"/><meta name="DCTERMS.source" content="http://xml.openoffice.org/odf2xhtml"/><meta name="DCTERMS.issued" content="2003-06-27T21:10:18" scheme="DCTERMS.W3CDTF"/><meta name="DCTERMS.modified" content="2006-07-12T13:39:00" scheme="DCTERMS.W3CDTF"/><meta name="DCTERMS.provenance" content="" xml:lang="en-US"/><meta name="DCTERMS.subject" content="," xml:lang="en-US"/><link rel="schema.DC" href="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCTERMS" href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCTYPE" href="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCAM" href="http://purl.org/dc/dcam/" hreflang="en"/><base href="."/><style type="text/css">
	@page {  }
	table { border-collapse:collapse; border-spacing:0; empty-cells:show }
	td, th { vertical-align:top; font-size:12pt;}
	h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 { clear:both }
	ol, ul { margin:0; padding:0;}
	li { list-style: none; margin:0; padding:0;}
	<!-- "li span.odfLiEnd" - IE 7 issue-->
	li span. { clear: both; line-height:0; width:0; height:0; margin:0; padding:0; }
	span.footnodeNumber { padding-right:1em; }
	span.annotation_style_by_filter { font-size:95%; font-family:Arial; background-color:#fff000;  margin:0; border:0; padding:0;  }
	* { margin:0;}
	.P1 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P10 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P2 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P3 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; font-style:normal; }
	.P4 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.P5 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; font-weight:normal; }
	.P6 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.P7 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.P8 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; font-style:normal; }
	.P9 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; font-style:normal; }
	.T10 { vertical-align:sub; font-size:75%;}
	.T11 { vertical-align:sub; font-size:75%;font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.T12 { vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;}
	.T13 { vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;font-style:normal; }
	.T14 { vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;font-weight:normal; }
	.T16 { font-weight:normal; }
	.T17 { font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.T18 { font-style:italic; font-weight:normal; }
	.T19 { font-family:Symbol; }
	.T2 { font-style:normal; }
	.T20 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T21 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T22 { font-family:Symbol; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.T23 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T24 { font-family:Symbol; }
	.T25 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T26 { font-style:normal; }
	.T27 { font-weight:normal; }
	.T29 { font-style:italic; }
	.T3 { font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.T4 { font-weight:normal; }
	.T5 { font-style:italic; font-weight:normal; }
	.T6 { font-family:Symbol; }
	.T7 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T8 { font-weight:normal; }
	.T9 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	<!-- ODF styles with no properties representable as CSS -->
	.Endnote_20_Symbol .Footnote_20_Symbol .Numbering_20_Symbols .T1 .T15 .T28 { }
	</style></head><body dir="ltr" style="max-width:8.5in;margin-top:1in; margin-bottom:1in; margin-left:1.25in; margin-right:1.25in; "><p class="P1">Chapter  10. Population decline</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">    Some natural processes show an exponential decrease, rather than an <span class="T2"> increase.  An important type of exponential decrease is shown by the decay rate of radioactive materials.</span> </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">    Element number 84, the first radioactive element, was discovered by Marie Curie, a Polish chemist working in Paris. She named it Polonium.   All of the elements from 84 to 92 are radioactive, which means that they are unstable, and break down spontaneously, emitting particles and rays. The atoms disintegrate on a predictable schedule, not according to the age of individual atoms, but according to the total present at any moment. The decay process is a statistical process, which can be described by equations like the population growth equations, but with a negative rate constant.</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P1">   The first radioactive element isolated was radium, separated from uranium ore by Marie (Fig. 10-1) and Pierre Curie in 1898. (Pierre taught her French, and she taught him Polish.) The decay process is symbolized by:</p><p class="P1">                                 <span class="T10"> 88</span>Ra<span class="T12">226</span>  -----&gt; <span class="T10"> 86</span>Rn<span class="T12">222 </span> + <span class="T15"> </span><span class="T20">a</span>  <span class="T3">                                    </span><span class="T1"> The products are a radon atom and an alpha particle, which consists of 2 protons and 2 neutrons, thus accounting for both the decrease of 2 in atomic </span></p><p class="P2">number and the decrease of 4 in atomic weight.The rate of decay is:                       </p><p class="P2"><span class="T10">         </span>                                     dN/dt =<span class="T24"> </span><span class="T25">l</span>N</p><p class="P1">N is number of atoms; <span class="T16"> </span><span class="T21">l</span><span class="T16"> </span>is a rate constant that is negative.</p><p class="P2">The same rearrangement and integration used in Chapter 7 yields:</p><p class="P2">                                      <span class="T16"> </span><span class="T21"> l</span> = (ln N<span class="T10">t </span>- ln N<span class="T10">0</span>) /<span class="T21">D</span>t                       <span class="T17">     </span><span class="T26">                                                                </span></p><p class="P3"> The decay constant can be calculated from the weight of the Curie sample, which was originally 200.0 mg, and 100 years later weighed 191.62 mg.  </p><p class="P3"><span class="T21">            l </span>= (ln 191.62 - ln 200.0) / 100y = - 0.042803122 / 100y =</p><p class="P1"><span class="T2">                           -0.00042803122/y =  - 4.28 X 10</span><span class="T13">-4</span><span class="T2">/y  </span></p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1"> <span class="T1">The decay constant is an important factor in the use of radioactivity in  tracer experiments, radiation therapy, and dating of ancient artifacts. Another  useful constant is called the half-life, which applies to a chemist who needs to get a life. No, not really. It is the time to lose one-half of the original radioactivity, and is related to the decay constant. For the radium sample, the calculation is: </span></p><p class="P1"><span class="T1">                 t</span><span class="T10">1/2 </span><span class="T1"> = ln 0.5/</span><span class="T6"> </span><span class="T7">l </span><span class="T8">=  -  0.69314718 / - 4.28 </span><span class="T1">X 10</span><span class="T12">-4  =</span><span class="T1"> 1620 years</span>                                   </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P1"><span class="T3"> </span><span class="T11"> </span><span class="T21">  </span><span class="T3"> All of the atoms of a single element are not identical. They all have the </span><span class="T3">same number of protons and electrons, and therefore the same atomic number, and the same chemistry. However, variation in the number of neutrons results in different kinds of atoms of the same element, called isotopes. For example, most carbon atoms are C-12, but there are three other isotopes. The abundances are </span><span class="T1">C</span><span class="T12">12 = </span><span class="T1">98.9%, </span><span class="T12"> </span><span class="T1">the heavy isotope C</span><span class="T12">13 =</span><span class="T1"> 1.1 %, and very small  quantities of C</span><span class="T12">11</span><span class="T1"> and C</span><span class="T12">14</span><span class="T1">, both radioisotopes.</span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">   C-11 has been produced from boron by bombardment with deuterons in a cyclotron. The reaction is symbolized by:</p><p class="P2">                                        <span class="T10">  5</span>B<span class="T12">10 </span>(d,n) <span class="T10">6</span>C<span class="T12">11</span></p><p class="P3">C<span class="T12">11</span> decays back to boron, and the emitted positron can be detected by the appropriate radiation counter. Until the atoms disintegrate, they behave chemically just like ordinary C-12 carbon. </p><p class="P3">                                    C<span class="T12">11 </span>-----&gt;  B<span class="T12">11 </span>+ <span class="T21">b</span><span class="T12">+</span></p><p class="P4">         </p><p class="P1">Exercise 10-1. The decay constant of C<span class="T12">11</span><span class="T1"> is</span> <span class="T21"> l</span><span class="T16"> = - 0.0340/ </span>min.<span class="T1"> Calculate the half-life.</span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P1"><span class="T1">   This result indicates that experiments with C</span><span class="T12">11</span><span class="T1"> must be completed quickly, or the radioactivity will decay to the point where there is too little to</span><span class="T2"> m</span><span class="T1">easure. The general rule is a limit of 8 times the half-life, in this case only 2 hours 43 minutes. On the other hand, C</span><span class="T12">14 </span><span class="T1"> has such a long half-life, 5730 years, that any spillage will contaminate the lab practically forever. </span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">   Small amounts of C<span class="T12">14</span> are continuously produced in the atmosphere by cosmic-ray bombardment of nitrogen. C-14 is produced in the laboratory by irradiation of N-14 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor, by the same n,p reaction.<span class="T11">                                        </span></p><p class="P4"><span class="T10">                                                      7</span>N <span class="T12">14 </span>(n,p)<span class="T10"> 6</span>C<span class="T12">14</span></p><p class="P6"> </p><p class="P2"><span class="T17">  (The subscript numbers 7 and 6 are superfluous, because every chemist   knows that nitrogen is element 7 and carbon is element 6.) </span><span class="T22">  </span><span class="T17">                                                     The decay is by emission of beta </span>particles, which are fast-moving electrons: </p><p class="P1"><span class="T1">                                     C</span><span class="T12">14</span><span class="T1"> -----&gt; N</span><span class="T12">14</span><span class="T1"> + </span><span class="T9">b</span><span class="T12">-</span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">    Carbon-14 has been extremely useful in tracing pathways of metabolism,   especially in photosynthesis studies, and in some aspects of medical research.</p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">     Important to archeologists was the use of C-14 by Willard F. Libby to determine the age of prehistoric artifacts. This radioactive isotope is present </p><p class="P2">at very low concentration in the CO<span class="T10">2</span> of the air. Carbon dioxide is used by plants to make sugars, starches, and cellulose. C-14 enters the bodies of animals that eat plants. When living things die, they are removed from the carbon cycle, the C<span class="T12">14</span> is no longer replenished, and it continues to decay. Thus, the samples of ancient wood, charcoal, and bone have less radioactivity than modern materials. Special apparatus, consisting of very sensitive detectors and heavy shielding, were built to record these extremely low levels of radiation.</p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2"> Exercise 10-2. Given the half-life of C-14 as 5730 years, calculate the decay constant. </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">The decay constant<span class="T24"> </span><span class="T25">l</span><span class="T16"> </span>can be used in the same way as the growth constant r in the population-growth equation, to calculate age of the sample counted:</p><p class="P2">The basic equation describing the process is: </p><p class="P2">                                    <span class="T27">  </span><span class="T23">D</span>t = (ln Nt - ln  N<span class="T10">0</span>) /<span class="T16"> </span><span class="T21">l </span></p><p class="P5"> </p><p class="P5">   For example, a sample of charcoal taken in 2000 from the late Neolithic Stonehenge site (Fig. 10-2) had C<span class="T12">14 </span>radioactivity = 7.96 counts per minute (c/m) per gram carbon. Modern samples of material from living organisms average 13.56 c/m per g C.</p><p class="P5"> </p><p class="P5">     <span class="T28">             </span><span class="T19">D</span>t = (ln 7.96 - ln 13.56) / - 0.000120968/ y = </p><p class="P5">                  -0.532695282/ - 0.000120968/y = 4 403.6 years before present                                                   </p><p class="P5">This makes the age of the Stonehenge site:  2000 - 4 404 = 2404 BC.</p><p class="P5">   </p><p class="P1"><span class="T4">     The Lascaux cave in the Dordogne region of France has many paintings</span>  made by a Paleolithic artist, including the long-extinct bison (Fig. 10-3).                                      </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Exercise 10-3. Using the modern radioactivity figure above, find the age of a sample of bone from the Lascaux cave that had 2.075 c/m per g C.                                                                                                     </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1"/><p class="P1">    Civilization had developed in Mesopotamia and Egypt long before Stonehenge, but some of the artifacts are less ancient. The funerary boat of Sesostris III (Fig. 10-3) was found in his burial chamber inside the pyramid near Dahshur, Egypt. A piece of wood, probably cedar, from the boat was obtained from the Chicago Natural History Museum by Dr. Lilly in 1949, and was analyzed for C-14 age.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Exercise 10-4. Assuming 13.56 dpm/g C for modern wood, and 8.56 for the  sample, calculate age of the boat. </p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   Willard F. Libby received a Nobel prize in 1960, published a book on radiocarbon dating in 1965, and died in 1980.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The C-14 method cannot be used for dating fossils, remains of organisms that lived millions of years ago. Some of these have been dated by the K<span class="T12">40</span> method. Many minerals contain potassium, and are found in the sedimentary rocks in which fossils are embedded. K<span class="T12">40 </span>has two decay products, Ca<span class="T12">40</span> and Ar<span class="T12">40</span>, so the analysis is complicated, requiring assumptions about the original quantity of K. Data from mass spectrometer analysis of a sample of mica from the Cambrian indicates N<span class="T10">0 </span>= 0.0741<span class="T16"> m</span>g of K<span class="T12">40</span>, and present Nt = 0.0541<span class="T16"> m</span>g. The decay constant is: <span class="T16"> </span><span class="T21">l</span><span class="T16"> </span>= 5.501 X 10<span class="T12">-10</span> / y.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1"><span class="T16">     </span><span class="T21">D</span>t = (ln 0.0541 - ln 0.0741) /  5.501 X 10<span class="T12">-10</span>/ y = 0.0571862 X 10<span class="T12">10 </span>y</p><p class="P1">                 = 570  X 10<span class="T12">6 </span><span class="T1">= 570 million years</span></p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">   Geologists agree that this is the correct age for the Cambrian, the earliest period with abundant animal fossils. About half of the known Cambrian fossils are trilobites, beautiful marine animals that became totally extinct in the Permian period.                                         </p><p class="P2"> </p><p class="P2">Exercise 10-5. With the value of<span class="T21"> l </span>above, calculate the age of<span class="T29"> </span><span class="T26">the trilobite</span><span class="T29"> Ctenopyge</span> (Fig.10-4) <span class="T26">from rock that now contains 0.05490 </span><span class="T17">m</span><span class="T26">mol K</span><span class="T13">40</span><span class="T26">, and originally contained 0.07308 mmol.</span></p><p class="P3">                               </p><p class="P3">   The time scale of the geological periods and epochs has been established  through the use of radioactive elements of known half-life.                            </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4"/><p class="P1"><span class="T3">    The decrease in sunlight with ocean depth also proceeds exponentially, as if each successive tiny layer were absorbing the same small fraction of light reaching it from above.  Here are measured fractions of blue-green light at various depths:</span><span class="T2">                                                                                                                   </span>                                                        </p><ol><li><ol><li><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;">          <span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P8" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span><span class="T16">  </span>surface                  1.0<span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P10" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span><span class="T2">  </span><span class="T3"> 5 m                      0.581                                                                                                          10 m                       0.338</span><span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p></li></ol></li></ol><ol><li><ol><li><p class="P9" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"> 21.2                       0.100<span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p></li></ol></li></ol><ol><li><ol><li><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"> 42.4                       0.010                                                                                                          <span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span> 50.4                       0.0042<span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span> 63.5                       0.0010 <span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p></li></ol></li></ol><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P2"><span class="T17"> Exercise 10-6. Draw a graph of fractional light intensity (y) </span><span class="T18">vs</span><span class="T17"> depth in meters (x).  Calculate a decay constant from the fractions at 10m and 21.2m.                                                                        </span></p><p class="P4">    </p><p class="P2"><span class="T17">    Survival of  humans decreases rapidly after age 75. A college alumni directory contains the names of all male alumni from each class. From this list, and the number of those whose deaths have been reported, an average fraction of those surviving to each year can be calculated.                    </span><span class="T12">                        </span></p><p class="P3"><span class="T16">            </span>         <span class="T16">    age              fraction living</span></p><p class="P4">                         25               1.0                     </p><ol><li><ol><li><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;">        35               1.0                                80           0.3962<span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span>        47               0.9766                          83           0.2586<span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P10" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span><span class="T3">        60               0.9296                          91           0.1304  </span><span class="T2">                                                                                                                                    </span>                                                        <span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P10" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span>        <span class="T3">68 </span>         <span class="T2">   </span><span class="T3">  0.867</span><span class="T2">                            </span><span class="T3">97           0.0385 </span><span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p></li></ol></li></ol><p class="P4">                         76              0.7857                         100           0.02564 </p><ol><li><ol><li><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;">        78               0.4925                        108           0.01613                                                        <span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p><p class="P7" style="margin-left:1.5979cm;"><span class="Numbering_20_Symbols" style="display:block;float:left;min-width:0.4991cm"><!-- --></span>                                                              110           0<span class="odfLiEnd"/> </p></li></ol></li></ol><p class="P1"><span class="T14"> </span><span class="T3">Exercise 10-7. Draw graph of fraction living (y) </span><span class="T5">vs </span><span class="T3">age (x), then a second graph of ln y </span><span class="T5">vs </span><span class="T3">x. </span></p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P1"><span class="T3">    Note the similarity between the graph of light in the ocean and</span><span class="T2"> </span><span class="T3">the graph   of survival after age 76.   </span><span class="T2">               </span>      </p><p class="P1">                                                  <span class="T16">                             </span></p><p class="P4">         </p><p class="P4">                     </p></body></html>