<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/MathML2/dtd/xhtml-math11-f.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><!--This file was converted to xhtml by OpenOffice.org - see http://xml.openoffice.org/odf2xhtml for more info.--><head profile="http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/"><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="application/xhtml+xml; charset=utf-8"/><title xml:lang="en-US">- no title specified</title><meta name="DCTERMS.title" content="" xml:lang="en-US"/><meta name="DCTERMS.language" content="en-US" scheme="DCTERMS.RFC4646"/><meta name="DCTERMS.source" content="http://xml.openoffice.org/odf2xhtml"/><meta name="DCTERMS.creator" content="Tom Verbeek"/><meta name="DCTERMS.issued" content="2001-05-07T17:11:04" scheme="DCTERMS.W3CDTF"/><meta name="DCTERMS.modified" content="2003-08-29T21:11:23" scheme="DCTERMS.W3CDTF"/><meta name="DCTERMS.provenance" content="" xml:lang="en-US"/><meta name="DCTERMS.subject" content="," xml:lang="en-US"/><link rel="schema.DC" href="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCTERMS" href="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCTYPE" href="http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/" hreflang="en"/><link rel="schema.DCAM" href="http://purl.org/dc/dcam/" hreflang="en"/><base href="."/><style type="text/css">
	@page {  }
	table { border-collapse:collapse; border-spacing:0; empty-cells:show }
	td, th { vertical-align:top; font-size:12pt;}
	h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 { clear:both }
	ol, ul { margin:0; padding:0;}
	li { list-style: none; margin:0; padding:0;}
	<!-- "li span.odfLiEnd" - IE 7 issue-->
	li span. { clear: both; line-height:0; width:0; height:0; margin:0; padding:0; }
	span.footnodeNumber { padding-right:1em; }
	span.annotation_style_by_filter { font-size:95%; font-family:Arial; background-color:#fff000;  margin:0; border:0; padding:0;  }
	* { margin:0;}
	.P1 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Times New Roman; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P10 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P11 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;background-color:transparent; }
	.P12 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; margin-bottom:0.0835in; margin-top:0in; text-align:center ! important; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P2 { color:#000000; font-size:10pt; font-family:Times New Roman; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P3 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Times New Roman; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P4 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P5 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; text-align:center ! important; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.P6 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; text-align:center ! important; }
	.P7 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P8 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.P9 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; writing-mode:lr-tb; background-color:transparent; }
	.Standard { color:#000000; font-size:12pt; font-family:Times New Roman; writing-mode:lr-tb; }
	.Table1 { width:6in; float:none; }
	.Table1_A1 { padding:0.0382in; border-left-width:0.0133cm; border-left-style:solid; border-left-color:#000000; border-right-style:none; border-top-width:0.0133cm; border-top-style:solid; border-top-color:#000000; border-bottom-width:0.0133cm; border-bottom-style:solid; border-bottom-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_A2 { padding:0.0382in; border-left-width:0.0133cm; border-left-style:solid; border-left-color:#000000; border-right-style:none; border-top-style:none; border-bottom-width:0.0133cm; border-bottom-style:solid; border-bottom-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_B1 { vertical-align:top; padding:0.0382in; border-left-width:0.0133cm; border-left-style:solid; border-left-color:#000000; border-right-style:none; border-top-width:0.0133cm; border-top-style:solid; border-top-color:#000000; border-bottom-width:0.0133cm; border-bottom-style:solid; border-bottom-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_B2 { vertical-align:bottom; padding:0.0382in; border-left-width:0.0133cm; border-left-style:solid; border-left-color:#000000; border-right-style:none; border-top-style:none; border-bottom-width:0.0133cm; border-bottom-style:solid; border-bottom-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_C1 { vertical-align:top; padding:0.0382in; border-width:0.0133cm; border-style:solid; border-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_C2 { vertical-align:bottom; padding:0.0382in; border-left-width:0.0133cm; border-left-style:solid; border-left-color:#000000; border-right-width:0.0133cm; border-right-style:solid; border-right-color:#000000; border-top-style:none; border-bottom-width:0.0133cm; border-bottom-style:solid; border-bottom-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_C3 { vertical-align:bottom; padding:0.0382in; border-left-width:0.0133cm; border-left-style:solid; border-left-color:#000000; border-right-width:0.0133cm; border-right-style:solid; border-right-color:#000000; border-top-style:none; border-bottom-width:0.0133cm; border-bottom-style:solid; border-bottom-color:#000000; }
	.Table1_A { width:2in; }
	.T1 { vertical-align:sub; font-size:58%;}
	.T10 { vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;background-color:transparent; }
	.T11 { vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;}
	.T12 { vertical-align:super; font-size:75%;font-style:normal; }
	.T13 { font-family:Standard Symbols L; }
	.T14 { vertical-align:sub; font-size:75%;}
	.T15 { color:#000000; font-size:14pt; }
	.T16 { font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; font-size:14pt; }
	.T17 { font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; font-size:14pt; }
	.T19 { font-style:normal; }
	.T20 { font-family:Symbol; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; }
	.T21 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T23 { background-color:transparent; }
	.T3 { background-color:transparent; }
	.T5 { font-family:Nimbus Roman No9 L; }
	.T6 { font-family:Symbol; font-weight:normal; }
	.T8 { background-color:transparent; }
	.T9 { vertical-align:super; font-size:58%;}
	<!-- ODF styles with no properties representable as CSS -->
	.Endnote_20_Symbol .Footnote_20_Symbol .T18 .T2 .T22 .T4 .T7 { }
	</style></head><body dir="ltr" style="max-width:8.5in;margin-top:1in; margin-bottom:1in; margin-left:1.25in; margin-right:1.25in; "><p class="P1">Chapter 8. Solid geometry</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The body of a woman with a weight on her head resembles a column or cylinder, as the architect of the Erechtheion must have recognized when he supported the top of the temple (the entablature) with caryatids (Fig. 8-1). Unlike these statuesque girls, a real live woman consumes food and oxygen, and loses heat to the environment at a measurable rate; she has a metabolism. One variable that correlates well with metabolic rate is body surface area. Let us consider the surface areas of several solid figures, and compare them to human dimensions and body surface area.</p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">   The volume of a cube is simply the length of one edge,  cubed : Vc <span class="T1"> </span>= L<span class="T2">3</span>.<span class="T4">   </span>If the edge is 37 cm, the volume is 37<span class="T2">3</span><span class="T9"> </span>= 50 653 cubic centimeters (cc). Since the liter is nearly the same as 1 000 cc, and the average density of sea water is 1.025 kg/L, this volume of sea water weighs 51.919 kg . </p><p class="P1">   The area of one face of a  cube is: L<span class="T11">2 </span>= 37<span class="T11">2</span> = 1 369 cm<span class="T11">2</span>. Since there are six faces, the surface of the whole cube is: 6 X 37<span class="T2">2 </span>= 8 214 cm<span class="T2">2 </span></p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">Next, consider the surface area of a sphere of the same  volume. The volume  of a sphere is:  Vs<span class="T1"> </span>= (4 /3)<span class="T13"></span> r<span class="T9"> </span><span class="T2">3          </span><span class="T4">(4/3 = 1 1/3 = 1.333...)</span></p><p class="P1"> </p><p class="P1">           r<span class="T2">3 </span>= V/1.333<span class="T13"></span> = 50 653 cc/ 4.188790205 = 12 092.513 cc.</p><p class="P1">                                        r =  <span class="T11">3</span><span class="T5">√</span> 12092.513 = 22.953 cm . </p><p class="P1">This is the radius of a sphere with the same volume as the cube above (Fig. 8-2). The surface of this sphere is: </p><p class="P1">                A<span class="T14">s</span> = 4<span class="T13"></span> r<span class="T2">2</span> = 4 <span class="T13"></span> X (22.953 cm)<span class="T11">2</span>  =  6 620.469 cm<span class="T2">2</span> .</p><p class="P1">The ratio of surface areas, sphere / cube = 6 620.469 / 8214 = 0.8060.</p><p class="P1">   </p><p class="P1">   This means that the sphere has 19.4% less surface than the equal-volume cube. In fact, the sphere has the least surface of any solid figure of the same volume. This is good for a storage tank, but bad for a person who wishes to lose weight, that is, become less spherical. The more spherical the body, the less surface per kg. The result is a lower weight-specific metabolic rate, and therefore a slower rate of weight loss.</p><p class="P3"> </p><p class="P2"><span class="T15">Exercise 8-1.  (a) A small bedroom is nearly cubical. </span><span class="T16">The floor is 3.0 m each side, and the ceiling height is</span> <span class="T16">2.60 m. </span> <span class="T16">Calculate the volume of the room.  (b) A spherical storage tank has a diameter of </span><span class="T15">3.002 m; calculate the volume. </span></p><p class="Standard"><span class="T16">  The volume of a cylinder is the area of the base, which is circular, times the height. To construct a cylinder with the same volume as the cube and </span><span class="T16">sphere above, begin by </span><span class="T17">selecting a base with a radius of  0.100 m. </span></p><p class="P4">    V =<span class="T19"> </span><span class="T20">p </span><span class="T19">r</span><span class="T12">2</span><span class="T9">  </span>h  = 50 653 cc =  0.050653 m<span class="T2">3 </span>  = 0.031415926 h,    </p><p class="P4">                                 h  = 0.050653 / 0.031415926 = 1.612m.                                                                                           </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4"> The volume here was shown to weigh 51.919 kg, if the material has the same density as sea water, which the human body does.  The calculated height of the woman-column is 1.612m (Figure 8-3).  The radius of this cylinder results in a circumference of  0.200<span class="T18"> </span><span class="T21">p</span>, which corresponds to a waistline of 62.8 cm (24 ¾ in.). Her BMI =  51.919 kg/ 2.5996 m<span class="T9"> </span><span class="T2">2  </span>= 19.97  kg/m<span class="T9"> </span><span class="T2">2</span>,<span class="T4"> at </span>the lower end of the healthy range. </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P7">     The surface area of a cylinder is the circumference of the base times the height, plus the areas of the bottom and top circles. The woman-column has suface area:</p><p class="P4"><span class="T4">         A = </span><span class="T2"> </span><span class="T4">2</span><span class="T6"> p</span><span class="T4"> r h + 2 </span><span class="T6">p</span><span class="T7"> </span><span class="T4">r</span><span class="T2">2 </span><span class="T4">= 1.01306  + 0.062831853 = 1.075891853 m</span><span class="T2">2</span> </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4">    Many formulas have been invented for relating weight and height of human subjects to body surface area (BSA). One proposed by DuBois in 1916 became popular for calculating the proper dose of a drug: </p><p class="P4">                                       </p><p class="P4">                                S = 0.007184 X W<span class="T9"> </span><span class="T2">0.425</span><span class="T9">   </span>X  H<span class="T2">0.725 </span>                                                 </p><p class="P4">This equation uses H in cm, W in kg, and yields S in m<span class="T11">2.</span> For the woman- column, W = 51.919 kg and H = 161.2 cm. The result of calculation is:          S = 1.53458 m<span class="T22">2</span><span class="T4">. The ratios of volume to surface (V/S) in Table 8-1 indicate that the shape of this lady does not match any of these three figures of solid geometry, but approaches the cylindrical. </span> </p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4">Table 8-1. Figures with the same volume (0.050653 m<span class="T11">3 </span>= 50.653 L).</p><p class="P4">                                                                                 </p><table border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" class="Table1"><colgroup><col width="222"/><col width="222"/><col width="222"/></colgroup><tr><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_A1"><p class="P4"> </p></td><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_B1"><p class="P5"> area  (m<span class="T2">2</span>)</p></td><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_C1"><p class="P6">V/S (L/m<span class="T2">2</span>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_A2"><p class="P4">sphere </p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_B2"><p class="P12">0.662045</p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_C2"><p class="P6">76.51</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_A2"><p class="P4">cube </p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_B2"><p class="P6">0.821400</p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_C3"><p class="P6">61.67</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_A2"><p class="P4">cylinder </p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_B2"><p class="P6">1.076310</p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_C3"><p class="P6">47.06</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;width:2in; " class="Table1_A2"><p class="P4">human body</p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_B2"><p class="P6">1.534580</p></td><td style="text-align:right; width:2in; " class="Table1_C3"><p class="P6">33.02</p></td></tr></table><p class="P4"> </p><p class="Standard"> <span class="T17">  Use of the equation above produces the result that a 4.536 kg (10 lbs) increase in body weight, with no change in height, increases weight by 8.73% and surface by 3.62 %. The body has become more spherical; </span><span class="T17">metabolic rate, since it is proportional to surface area, would also increase less than weight.  </span></p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P4">   The classic BSA equation, still in use, over-estimates the surface of obese people. A recent revision changes the exponents, and gives the result in cm<span class="T11">2</span><span class="T4">:</span></p><p class="P4">                            </p><p class="P4">                                    S = 94.9 X W<span class="T11">0.441</span> X H<span class="T11">0.655</span></p><p class="P4"> </p><p class="P10">Exercise 8-2. With the revised equation, re-calculate the BSA of the woman-column. To get further practice with the y<span class="T11">x</span> function on the calculator, find BSA by both equations for John Godina, who is 193.0 cm tall, and weighs 129.0 kg.</p><p class="P10"> </p><p class="P10">   Like a fossil in the rocks,  the cubic foot remains stuck in the literature. To convert:</p><p class="P10">                          1 m = 39.37 inches     1 m<span class="T3">3 </span><span class="T10"> </span><span class="T8">= (39.37)</span><span class="T3">3 </span><span class="T8"> = 61 023.37795 in</span><span class="T3">3</span></p><p class="P8"><span class="T23">                          1 ft = 12 in               1ft</span><span class="T3"> 3 </span><span class="T23">= (12)</span><span class="T3">3 </span><span class="T23"> =  1 728 in</span><span class="T3">3  </span></p><p class="P9">                              61 023/1728  = 35.314 cubic feet = 1 cubic meter</p><p class="P9"> </p><p class="P10"><span class="T8">Exercise 8-3.  (1) Convert </span>the volumes in Exercise 8-1 to cubic feet.</p><p class="P10">(2)  If a cylinder has the same radius as a sphere, and a height of 2r, then the sphere fits inside the cylinder like a tennis ball in a can that holds only one ball. Use the equations above to find what fraction of the can volume is occupied by the ball.</p><p class="P11"> </p><p class="P9">  The last problem was solved by Archimedes, who asked that the sphere-in-cylinder figure be inscribed on his tombstone. Look for it, when you visit Syracuse.   </p></body></html>